===[ Text Addendum 08 ]==============================================
                  gforth: OpenGL Graphics Lesson 01
=====================================================================
          File: libutil.txt
        Author: Timothy Trussell
          Date: 07/06/2010
   Description: Library Utility for gforth OpenGL Tutorial Install
  Linux System: Ubuntu v10.04 LTS i386, kernel 2.6.31-23
=====================================================================

The libutil.sh file is a Linux bash script, and is designed to aid in
the installation and re-compilation of the NeHe OpenGL Tutorials that
I have recoded for gforth.

It has only been tested on the above listed version of Linux.

Use of this utility is optional, as the Tutorial files can be used
from any directory, but the main purpose of the program is to
eliminate the need to remove previous libcc interface compilations by
hand when a new Tutorial is to be installed (or when you have made
changes to the libcc file of your own, and need to remove the
existing compilations so the new version will compile/link/run).

Use of an external script file also accomplishes another necessary
function: in order to compile a newer (or modifed) libcc file after
you have compiled/linked/run your program with an older version, it
is necessary to exit gforth to unlink the previous compilation.

If you have downloaded this from the comp.lang.forth newsgroup, there
is a chance (probability) that the file will not run correctly, due
to conversion problems (I have to convert to MS-DOS format to get the
text to post correctly).

What I have had to do is install the FLIP utility, which converts
text files from/to Linux/Unix and MS-DOS (Windows) formats.

Enter "sudo apt-get install flip" in your terminal to install the
utility, and then enter "flip -u libutil.sh" to convert the file back
to the Linux/Unix format.

The other thing you will have to do is set the permissions on the
file to allow it to be executed.  From the Program Manager (Ubuntu)
right-click the mouse on the file libutil.sh, select Properties, then
Permissions, and click the box for 'Allow executing file as program'
and you will be all set.

The version in the .zip files should not have this problem.

---[Note]------------------------------------------------------------
If you are NOT making changes to the libcc interface code there is no
need to exit gforth between compile/run cycles to unlink the libcc
code. This is only necessary if the libcc definitions have been
changed so that the new (or modifed) definitions will be compiled.

The libcc interface files being referenced are:

        mini-sdl-1.00.fs
        mini-opengl-1.xx.fs
        mini-opengl-current.fs

These are the files that making changes in would require you to exit
gforth to unlink the libraries, so that they could be recompiled in
the next compile/run cycle.

If you *have* modified these files, then you will want to use this
utiltiy to remove the previous mini_opengl_lib files.
--------------------------------------------------------[End Note]---

A basic installation of gforth creates a hidden .gforth directory in
your /home/<user> directory.  This .gforth directory is where the
libcc interface files are created, in ~/.gforth/libcc-named.
A second directory, ~/.gforth/libcc-named/.libs is also created.

(The /libcc-named and /libcc-named/.libs directories are created when
you compile a libcc interface file, not during gforth installation.)

If the /home/<user>/.gforth directory is not present the script will
abort, since without that base directory none of the rest of the
script functions can be executed.

What this script does is to create an additional directory in your
~/.gforth directory, ~/.gforth/opengl-libs, and copies files from the
Tutorial distribution to that location.

This is accomplished from the command line by first changing to the
directory where the distribution is located, and then executing the
libutil.sh script with one of the commands line options.

Entering ./libutil.sh -? displays the following help:

  LibUtil Usage:
        libutil.sh -i  installs lesson files
        libutil.sh -l  displays ~/.gforth/.. directories
        libutil.sh -r  deletes previous mini_opengl_lib files
        libutil.sh -s  deletes previous mini_sdl_lib files
        libutil.sh -rs deletes both mini-sdl- and opengl-lib files
        libutil.sh -?  shows this help

(Even this help display is bypassed if the .gforth directory can not
be found.)

---[Note]------------------------------------------------------------
It is expected that gforth has already been installed and the .gforth
directory has been created in your /home/<user> directory, prior to
trying to use this script. 

It would also be good for the SDL and OpenGL libraries to have been
installed on your system already. The libcc files will not compile
without them installed.

You DID read my "gforth: OpenGL Graphics Part I" column, right?

(The /home/<user>/.gforth directory is NOT where gforth is installed.
gforth on my system has been installed in the /usr/bin, /usr/lib and
/usr/share directories.)
--------------------------------------------------------[End Note]---

If, for some reason, your .gforth directory is located somewhere else
you will need to edit the libutil.sh script and change the strings to
reflect what your system uses.

===[ Executing LibUtil ]=============================================

The libutils.sh script file can be run directly from the directory
where all of the tutorial files are located, or it can be placed into
the Linux path, a likely place being the /bin directory, so that it
can be executed without being in the current directory.

It has been designed to be non-Tutorial-specific. It will scan the
PWD (current working directory) for the latest Tutorial present,
extract the lesson number from that filename, and install (if you
have used the <-i> command line option) the files for that Tutorial.

If an <opengl-lesson> file is NOT found, the script will abort.

The script will handle having ALL of the Tutorials placed in the same
directory, which should not be a problem, as there will only be three
new code files for each Tutorial (after the first one), plus a data/
directory when we get to the sixth Tutorial, and the contents of that
directory can also be combined with those Tutorials that follow.

===[ Command Line Options ]==========================================

---[ -i: Install lesson files ]--------------------------------------

Usage:  ./libutil.sh -i

This command processes the current directory to verify that all of
the source files required are present.

It next displays the default locations of the source and destination
directories, allowing the user to exit if they are not correct, so as
to modify the libutil.sh strings to match what their system requires.

The next step is to create the /home/<user>/.gforth/opengl-libs
directory if it does not already exist.

If the mini-opengl-current.fs file already exists in this directory,
it is now deleted.

A new mini-opengl-current.fs file is created by copying the latest
libcc interface file in the source directory, mini-opengl-1.xx.fs,
to it. (All of the mini-opengl libcc files are cumulative, so the
definitions in the latest file include everything from the previous
mini-opengl files.  This is why it is important to run this install
when a new Tutorial is being installed, so that you do not have to
do this again just to run one of the previous Tutorials.)

The presence of the SDL dependancy files is now checked, and if they
are not in the destination directory are now copied there.

The last step is to remove any compiled mini_opengl_lib files in the
directories:

        /home/<user>/.gforth/libcc-named 
        /home/<user>/.gforth/libcc-named/.libs

The compiled SDL files are NOT removed during this install process,
if they exist, but can be specifically removed using the <-s> and
<-rs> command line options, explained below.

---[ -l: Display directories ]---------------------------------------

Usage:  ./libutil.sh -l

This command is informational, and simply displays the contents of
the following directories:

        /home/<user>/.gforth/libcc-named 
        /home/<user>/.gforth/libcc-named/.libs
        /home/<user>/.gforth/opengl-libs

---[ -r: Delete previous mini_opengl_lib files ]---------------------

Usage:  ./libutil.sh -r

This command is used to remove any compiled mini_opengl_lib files in
the directories:

        /home/<user>/.gforth/libcc-named 
        /home/<user>/.gforth/libcc-named/.libs

It does NOT remove the mini-opengl-current.fs file in the directory
/home/<user>/.gforth/opengl-libs though.

---[ -s: Delete previous mini_sdl_lib files ]------------------------

Usage:  ./libutil.sh -s

This command is used to remove any compiled mini_sdl_lib files in the
directories:

        /home/<user>/.gforth/libcc-named 
        /home/<user>/.gforth/libcc-named/.libs

It does NOT remove the mini-sdl-1.00.fs file in the directory
/home/<user>/.gforth/opengl-libs though.

---[ -rs: delete both mini-sdl- and opengl-lib files ]---------------

Usage:  ./libutil.sh -rs

This command performs both of the <-r> and <-s> functions, removing
any compiled mini_opengl-lib AND mini-sdl-lib files from the
directories:

        /home/<user>/.gforth/libcc-named 
        /home/<user>/.gforth/libcc-named/.libs

As with the <-r> and <-s> commands, the source files in the directory
/home/<user>/.gforth/opengl-libs are NOT deleted.

---[ -?: display help ]----------------------------------------------

Usage:  ./libutil.sh -?
        ./libutil.sh

This command (as well as not passing a command) will display a usage
message to the terminal.

===[ Example of Use ]================================================

A typical example of when to use this utility during a normal session
of programming is when I am coding the additions to the Tutorials, as
each new Tutorial usually adds new OpenGL functions to explore.

After the changes to the source are made, I would then go back to my
gforth terminal window, press Ctrl-D to exit to the terminal, and run
the libutil script with:

        ./libutil.sh -r

to remove the previous mini_opengl_lib.* files in .gforth/libcc-named
and .gforth/libcc-named/.libs.

(After the first use, the command <./libutil.sh -r> is now in the
keyboard buffer, so all I do is press the <Up Arrow> to find it in
the listing, and press <enter> to run it.)

I then <Up Arrow> to re-enter gforth, press the <Up Arrow> to scroll
through the gforth keyboard buffer to the

        include opengl-lessonxx.fs
        
entry, press <enter> to recompile all of the libcc interface code,
and then <Up Arrow> one last time to <lessonxx> to run the program.

 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---

Remember, simply deleting the old versions of the compiled libcc code
(like from a second terminal window) is not enough - you have to exit
gforth to unlink the code from the gforth system.

 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---

Currently, I use the <gedit> program in Ubuntu for editing my gforth
source files.  It recognizes the .fs suffix and provides command
colorization and several other nice features that aid you visually
while programming, as well as being a multiple file editor (each file
is opened in a separate tab in the window bar).

=================================================[End libutil.txt]===

