---[ gforth: SDL/OpenGL Graphics Part V ]-------------[02/26/2010]---

                         by Timothy Trussell

---[ Information ]---------------------------------------------------

This column, as with the rest of this series of columns, will be 
posted to the Taygeta Forth Achive site:

ftp://ftp.taygeta.com/pub/Forth/Archive/tutorials/gforth-sdl-opengl/

in the file:

     sdl-tut05.zip

It may take a little time for the files to be moved to the above
directory, so keep checking until they have been placed there.

---[ Where We Are ]--------------------------------------------------

We have all of primitives needed to put a library together, so we
will go ahead and do that.

The function listing of our library consists of the following:

  \ ---[ SDL Primitives ]--------------------------------------------
  \ Basic primitive functions library

  \     -------------------
  \ ---[ Prototype Listing ]-----------------------------------------
  \     -------------------

  \ : SDLLib-Version              ( -- )

  \ : Error-End                   ( f addr n -- )
  \ : Terminate-String            ( a n -- a )
  \ : Set-Mode-Parms              ( mode -- )
  \ : InitGraph                   ( mode a n -- )
  \ : CloseGraph                  ( -- )

  \ : <PlotPixel>                 { *ofs _pixel _bytepp -- }
  \ : PutPixel                    { *dst _x _y _pixel -- }
  \ : Line                        { *dst _x1 _y1 _x2 _y2 _pixel -- }
  \ : VLine                       { *dst _x _y1 _y2 _pixel -- }
  \ : HLine                       { *dst _x1 _x2 _y _pixel -- }
  \ : <Draw-Image>                { *dst _x _y _w _h *src tflag -- }
  \ : PutImage                    ( *dst _x _y _w _h *src -- )
  \ : PutSprite                   ( *dst _x _y _w _h *src -- )

  \ : Splash-Screen               ( -- )
  \ --------------------------------------------[ End Prototypes ]---

---[ Error-End ]---

This our SDL error code handler.  It is passed a boolean flag and an
error string.  If the flag resolves to a 0 value, then the SDL
function completed successfully, and Error-End does nothing.

If the flag resolves to a non-zero value then the SDL function was
not successful.  In this case, we need to shut down the SDL systems,
close the display window, and print the error message to the terminal
window. It then drops out of gforth.

---[  Terminate-String ]---

The SDL functions require that any strings passed are delimited with
a 0 value.  This function converts the normal gforth string to this
format.  To do this, the passed string has to have an extra byte at
the end, which will be converted to a zero value.

Example:

   s" This is to be passed to an SDL function0" Terminate-String

The address and length of the string is passed to Terminate-String,
which changes the "0" character to an actual zero value, and leaves
just the address of the string on the stack.

---[ Set-Mode-Parms ]---

This function is a shortcut, to allow you to change the resolution 
settings for the display window by changing only one parameter - the
one you use in your main function when calling InitGraph:

        640x480x8 s" Window-Title0" InitGraph

It also sets the following user variables - which the SDL library
functions do not see (directly):

        window-screenw
        window-screenh
        window-screenbpp

---[ InitGraph ]---

The call to InitGraph has been changed to allow you to set the
window title by passing a string as the second (and third) parameters
to the InitGraph call.  If you do not want to display a window title,
simply put two NULL entries as the parameters instead:

        640x480x8 NULL NULL InitGraph

If you set the VALUE mouse-cursor-display to TRUE, then InitGraph
will turn off the mouse cursor, so if you happen to run the mouse
over the display window while the program is running.

---[ CloseGraph ]---

Re-enables the mouse cursor if mouse-cursor-display is TRUE, then
shuts down the SDL subsystems and closes the display window.

The only surface that is freed when the SDL video subsystem is shut
down is screen-surface, which is allocated during the InitGraph call.
It is the programmers' responsibility to free any additional memory
allocations that the program has made (such as additional surfaces).

I would suggest the coding of your own version of Error-End, which
will also free allocated memory prior to closing down SDL.

---[ Graphics Primitives ]---

These primitives were discussed in my last column:

        <PlotPixel>
        PutPixel
        Line
        VLine
        HLine
        <Draw-Image>
        PutImage
        PutSprite

and have a few more comments attached to them in this file.

---[ Splash Screen ]---

The last word in this library is included to show that the basic
functions of the library work, by initializing SDL, opening a display
window, loading and displaying a .BMP image, pausing, and then
closing down everything.

The archive version (at the Taygeta Forth Archive site) will include
the splash screen, which I am not going to attempt to post with this
column.

---[ Wrapping It Up ]------------------------------------------------

This completes the basic graphics primitives library, which will let
us run the animation demo that I originally wrote for my Graphics of
the Second Kind, Parts III and IV columns.

------------------------------------------[ End of sdl-tut05.txt ]---

