---[ gforth: OpenGL Graphics Lesson 26 ]--------------[05/27/2011]---

                         by Timothy Trussell

---[ Information ]---------------------------------------------------

This column will be posted to the Taygeta Forth Achive site:

ftp://ftp.taygeta.com/pub/Forth/Archive/tutorials/gforth-sdl-opengl/

in the file:

     opengl-lesson26.zip

along with all required source files.

It may take a little time for the files to be moved to the above
directory, so keep checking until they have been placed there.

---[ Where We Are ]--------------------------------------------------

Read thru the Tutorial for Lesson 26 at

      http://nehe.gamedev.net/data/lessons/lesson.asp?lesson=26

for the description of what is going on with this code.

---[ Additions ]-----------------------------------------------------

Additions to the mini-opengl libcc interface for this lesson are:

gl-clear-stencil ( s -- )

    Specify the clear value for the stencil buffer

    Parameter <s> is an integer value.

      s: Specifies the index used when the stencil buffer is cleared.
         The initial value is 0

gl-clip-plane ( plane *equation -- )

    Specify a plane against which all geometry is clipped

    Parameter <plane> is an integer value; <*equation> is a pointer
        to an array of floating point doubles (64-bit floats)

      plane: Specifies which clipping plane is being positioned.
          Symbolic names of the form GL_CLIP_PLANE i, where i is an
          integer between 0 and GL_MAX_CLIP_PLANES - 1, are accepted

      equation: Specifies the address of an array of four double
          precision floating-point values. These values are
          interpreted as a plane equation.

gl-color-mask ( red green blue alpha -- )

    Enable and disable writing of frame buffer color components

    Parameters <red>, <green>, <blue> and <alpha> are boolean values.
    
      RGBA: Specify whether red, green, blue, and alpha can or cannot
          be written into the frame buffer. The initial values are
          all GL_TRUE, indicating that the color components can be
          written.
      
gl-flush ( -- )

    Force execution of GL commands in finite time

    No parameters passed.
    
    Different GL implementations buffer commands in several different
    locations, including network buffers and the graphics accelerator
    itself. glFlush empties all of these buffers, causing all issued
    commands to be executed as quickly as they are accepted by the
    actual rendering engine. Though this execution may not be
    completed in any particular time period, it does complete in
    finite time.

    Because any GL program might be executed over a network, or on an
    accelerator that buffers commands, all programs should call
    glFlush whenever they count on having all of their previously
    issued commands completed. For example, call glFlush before
    waiting for user input that depends on the generated image.
                
gl-stencil-func ( func ref mask -- )

    Set function and reference value for stencil testing

    Parameters <func>, <ref> and <mask> are integer values.

      func: Specifies the test function. Eight tokens are valid:
          GL_NEVER, GL_LESS, GL_LEQUAL, GL_GREATER,
          GL_GEQUAL, GL_EQUAL, GL_NOTEQUAL, and
          GL_ALWAYS. The initial value is GL_ALWAYS.

      ref: Specifies the reference value for the stencil test. ref is
         clamped to the range [0,2^n-1], where n is the number of
         bitplanes in the stencil buffer. The initial value is 0.
                                        

      mask: Specifies a mask that is ANDed with both the reference
          value and the stored stencil value when the test is done.
          The initial value is all 1's.

gl-stencil-mask ( mask -- )

    Control the writing of individual bits in the stencil planes
    
    Parameter <mask> is an integer value.
    
      mask: Specifies a bit mask to enable and disable writing of
          individual bits in the stencil planes.
          Initially, the mask is all 1's.

gl-stencil-op ( fail zfail zpass -- )

    Set stencil test actions

    Parameters <fail>, <zfail> and <zpass> are integer values.

      fail: Specifies the action to take when the stencil test fails.
          Six symbolic constants are accepted:
          GL_KEEP, GL_ZERO, GL_REPLACE,
          GL_INCR, GL_DECR, and GL_INVERT.
          The initial value is GL_KEEP.

      zfail: Specifies the stencil action when the stencil test
          passes, but the depth test fails. zfail accepts the same
          symbolic constants as fail. The initial value is GL_KEEP.

      zpass: Specifies the stencil action when both the stencil test
          and the depth test pass, or when the stencil test passes
          and either there is no depth buffer or depth testing is not
          enabled. zpass accepts the same symbolic constants as fail.
          The initial value is GL_KEEP.

 --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- --- ---

For a full description of what the above functions are capable of
doing, you will need to research the OpenGL documentation both on the
Internet, and in a selection of books that cover OpenGL programming.

Which books?  Go to amazon.com and search for OpenGL under books.

"Beginning OpenGL Game Programming, Second Edition" by Luke Benstead
is a good choice to start with, if you have no idea which to select.

This is pretty much the case for all of the functions that have been
implemented in the NeHe OpenGL Lessons.  As NeHe has said, these are
not meant to specifically teach you how to implement OpenGL code, but
serve more as an example of various aspects of available functions.

---[ Installation ]--------------------------------------------------

If you are placing all of the Lessons in one directory, copy these
files to that directory:

        opengl-lesson26.fs      - Code Addendum 1
        opengllib-1.26.fs       - Code Addendum 2
        mini-opengl-1.26.fs     - Code Addendum 3

This Lesson requires the mini-sdl-1.02.fs file from Lesson 24 as well
as all of the usual constants definition files.

This Lesson uses three data files which you can retrieve from the
NeHe Lesson 26 page (use the Visual C++ .zip for these) at the above
posted web address, or from the opengl-lesson26.zip file that will be
posted to the Taygeta Forth Archives site listed at the start of this
column.

For the files from the opengl-lesson26.zip, extract them to wherever
you wish to place them, or extract the above files and the data
directory into the directory you have placed the previous Lesson
files.

To use the LibUtil script, set the flag in opengllib-1.26.fs:

        1 =: UseLibUtil

and then run the script to install the files to the ~/.gforth dirs:

        cd <your-directory> <cr>
        ./libutil.sh -ra <cr>
        ./libutil.sh -i <cr>
        gforth
        include opengl-lesson26.fs
        lesson26

If you prefer not to use the LibUtil script, set the flag to:

        0 =: UseLibUtil

and then you can execute the Lesson code with:

        cd <your-directory> <cr>
        gforth
        include opengl-lesson26.fs
        lesson26

---[ Addition to the Base Code ]-------------------------------------

Initialization of the Stencil Buffer

In order to access the Stencil Buffer, it is necessary to set a pair
of OpenGL attributes, which is done by the Init-Stenciling word in
the Base Code listing (opengl-lesson26.fs).  These attributes have to
be set *before* initializing the video via the sdl-set-video-mode
function (in the Init-Video word).

I will be leaving this function in the Base Code file for all future
Lessons, though it will only be called if the code is utilizing the
Stencil Buffer.

---[ Errata ]--------------------------------------------------------

Found an error in the sdlkeysym.fs file with the definition of the
SDLK_z constant.  The correct value is [122], rather than the [121]
that is present in (probably) all previous postings of this file.

You have the option of replacing all previous versions with this one,
or changing the entry yourself in your current file.

---[ Next Up ]-------------------------------------------------------

Lesson 27 - Shadows

----------------------------------------------------[End Lesson26]---
